we have defined an emergency as any
event which threatens the safety of the
vessel and all those on board in many
cases a well-prepared skipper and crew
can cope with troubles at sea or on
inland waters without seeking outside
assistance in other cases calling for
help is a necessity it is important to
appreciate what emergencies you might
encounter so that if you are faced with
one you don't panic and you have a plan
of action to cope with it six common
emergencies are Man Overboard fire
collision with another vessel navigation
mark rock or marine structure running
aground engine failure capsized or
swapping
the steps you should take after raising
the alarm with your crew are Man
Overboard first throw a lifebuoy or
another flotation device such as an
inflated fender to the person in the
water reduce speed appoint someone to be
the pointer it is the pointers job to
continually point their arm at the
person in the water it is vitally
important that the pointer does not take
their eyes off the person otherwise he
or she may be lost to sight the helmsman
can use the direction of the pointers
arm to help him steer back to the person
check the direction of the wind and the
waves turn the boat to come up to the
person into the wind and then turn
alongside the person at the last moment
turn the engine or engines off now bring
the person on board fire position the
boat to the wind to reduce the draft to
the fire close any hatches so that the
wind is not spread it shut off the fuel
remove any flammable items aim the
extinguisher at the base of the fire or
smother it with a fire blanket wet
blanket or wet towel after the fire is
extinguished cool the area with water to
prevent a flare-up collision with the
another vessel navigation mark rock or
marine structure immediately put the
engine or engines into neutral if
someone has been thrown overboard throw
them a flotation device or if someone is
seriously injured attend to them first
if you're a ground or a fixed to the
other object check that you're not
taking in water if you are do not try to
move your vessel until you've stemmed
the flow if you cannot stop the flow or
if you cannot break free call or signal
for assistance
running a ground immediately put the
engine into neutral the seabed is
usually mud or sand so if you do go a
ground it is unlikely that you'll
seriously damage your whole often you
can get your vessel off quickly by using
your crew to move their weight to one
into the boat or to one side of the boat
sometimes raising your engine or leg
will set you free if you cannot get off
check what the tide is doing if it's
coming in you're in luck and should
float free soon if the tide is going out
you're in for a longer wait don't leave
the boat prepare everyone on board for
the weather that you're expecting in
particular beware of sunburn and
dehydration if it's necessary to stop
the boat drifting into danger when it
floats free put out the anchor with a
considerable length of chain and rope so
that it will be made fast against the
wind and tide use your marine radio or
phone to report your position and
situation engine failure the two most
common reasons for marine engines
failing to start are either running out
of fuel or a flat battery if your motor
can't be started by hand the answer in
both of these situations is to call for
assistance before you do so check that
the fuel line and battery leads are
properly connected if your engine will
not start for some other reason check
the troubleshooting guide in your engine
handbook before calling for help this
may help you to fix the problem yourself
if not you'll need to seek assistance
via radio phone or flare capsize ore
swamp another overloading the main
reasons for vessels taking in vast
quantities of water are big C's or
breaking waves
in both these cases you'd have been
aware beforehand that the vessel and
crew were facing danger and everybody
should have already been wearing their
pfds or life jackets even when the
vessel is floundering it is most
important that everyone stays with it it
is far easier for rescuers to find an
upturned hull than a bobbing head if
people are in sight signal for help if
not set off your epub or a flare